chore(MADR): write initial architectural decisions (#1)
ar-io/ar-io-ant-registry-process: docs/madr/1-intial.md

Reviewer: this file is incorrectly named. should be `1-initial.md`

> # An event driven ANT registration system in AO to optimize ANT listings by access role

Reviewer: You're suggesting the implementation approach in this title.

```suggestion
# ArNS ANT Registry
```

Author: https://github.com/ar-io/ar-io-ant-registry-process/pull/1#discussion_r1689177601

- Status: accepted
- Deciders: [Dylan], [Ariel], [Phil]
- Date: 2024-07-22
- Authors: [Atticus], [Dylan], [Ariel], [Phil]

## Context and Problem Statement

> Listing all ANTs registered to ArNS names and owned by a specific owner or

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Listing all ANTs registered to [ArNS] names and owned by a specific owner or
```

and add link to arns docs at bottom

owners becomes more computationally expensive as more ArNS names are registered.

> Additionally, its computationally infeasible to find ANTs not registered to an

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Additionally, its computationally expensive and non-deterministic to find ANTs not registered to an
```

Reviewer: non-deterministic bc we may not find the same results every time, using known tools like Graphql and AO

ArNS. GraphQL-based approaches cannot currently support either of these
scenarios.

> We need to provide owner-based lookups that perform better than O(N).
> 
> This is done both on the client side via [AoConnect], or as inter-process
> communication (like in the [ArNS Resolver](#arns-resolver)).

Reviewer: This is confusing.

```suggestion
Ultimately, a permissionless and efficient data store of ANT ownership for ArNS-affiliated client applications (e.g., Arconnect, arns.app, BazAR, etc.) would improve the discoverability, extensibility, and usability of ANTs.
```

### Additional Background

> The ArNS AO Process is responsible for recording which ANTs are registered to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The [IO/AO Process] is responsible for recording which ANTs are registered to
```

and include link to repo

each ArNS name. It does not store or track additional information about the
owner of the ANT. This reduces the amount of state managed, providing more
concurrency in the operations in the overall name system's design, (e.g.
individual ANT's activities do not impact performance of the ArNS Process).

> 

Reviewer: i don't see any mention of _why_ we have ANTs in the first place. may be worth mentioning why ownership information is stored in an ANT vs. the registry itself.

The downside of this separation is that listing all the ANTs for any owner is
computationally expensive. You need to retrieve every ArNS record and perform a
lookup of each associated ANT's owner, then filter the resulting owner map by
the owner(s) in question - an O(N) operation where N is the total number of
registered names. An additional downside is that unregistered (from an ArNS
perspective) ANTs that one owns are not discoverable via this expensive
algorithm.

## Decision Drivers

The main drivers for this decision revolve around:

- **Speed**
  - Uses fewer resources client-side.
- **Scalability**
  - We cannot load the entire ArNS ecosystem client-side if it grows.
- **Ecosystem Integrations**
  - Having this utility process solely for ANT contract indexing provides
    integration points for other applications and reduces our reliance on other
    teams/products (e.g., Bazar profile processes).
- **Maintainability**
  - Since we control the registry process, we can drive its maintenance.

## Considered Options

### Dedicated ANT Registry Process

> An AO Process that allows for permissionless reporting of the existence of ANTs
> by their Process ID that is capable of asynchronously, by way of AO messaging,
> retrieving, or being notified about, and then caching indexable information
> about ANTs, namely their owners and Controllers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A permissionless AO Process that maintains a registry of ANTs and their respective ownership information. 
```

- **Pros:**
  - Dedicated registry for ANTs.
  - Event-driven updates from ANTs.
  - Separate state and compute from the resolver process, thus preserving system

>     concurrency while providing for better UX in the system.

Reviewer: this is suggesting the resolver is a permanent part of the stack. I'd say opportunity to integrate full name resolution via a separate process or internally.

Author: I don't understand what you mean.

whereby the profile itself owns the assets it is tracking, and the profile is owned
by the user. This allows for event driven portfolio management. The Profile Registry
is a similar organism to the ANT Registry, therein tracking existing profiles that
register themselves to at, allowing for profile discovery by user address.

- **Pros:**
  - Promising technology.
  - Future integration potential.
- **Cons:**
  - **Currently in rapid development.**
  - Managed by another team.
  - Complicates ownership resolution due to account abstraction.

## Decision Outcome

After weighing the pros and cons, it was decided to use an
[ANT registry](#dedicated-ant-registry-process).

### Positive Consequences

- Asset discovery will be optimized, allowing easy querying for users' assets,
  specifically ANT processes, which can then be used to retrieve owned domains
  from the network process.

### Negative Consequences

- Maintenance: It is another process for us to maintain, though it seems
  necessary.
- Future Redundancy: The problem this is solving may be solved in the future by
  more ecosystem-wide projects (e.g., Bazar profiles), making this redundant.

## Links

- [Bazar Profiles]

---

> [AoConnect]: (https://github.com/permaweb/ao/tree/main/connect)
> [Bazar Profiles]:
>   (https://github.com/permaweb/ao-permaweb/tree/main/services/profiles)
> [ADR Template]: (https://adr.github.io/)
> [Atticus]: (https://github.com/atticusofsparta)
> [Dylan]: (https://github.com/dtfiedler)
> [Ariel]: (https://github.com/arielmelendez)
> [Phil]: (https://github.com/vilenarios)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[AoConnect]: https://github.com/permaweb/ao/tree/main/connect
[Bazar Profiles]: https://github.com/permaweb/ao-permaweb/tree/main/services/profiles
[ADR Template]: https://adr.github.io/
[Atticus]: https://github.com/atticusofsparta
[Dylan]: https://github.com/dtfiedler
[Ariel]: https://github.com/arielmelendez
[Phil]: https://github.com/vilenarios
```

> # Asset resolution by way of an ANT Registry

Reviewer 2: `Asset resolution` is kind of a nebulous term here, but, being in the title, it's centrally important to describing what we're deciding upon. Consider, `A permissionless ANT registration system in AO to optimize ANT listings by owner`.

Author: I instead went for `An event driven ANT Registry in AO to optimize ANT discovery by access role`

Registration is permissionless, the actual updates of the state are permissioned to the registered ANT, and the ACL handler is permissionless. It is also not solely for owners but controllers as well, and discovery seemed like a more granular definition of our goals for this than listings. WDYTAT?

Reviewer: FWIW - `event driven` is suggesting a specific type of implementation and we consider non event driven approaches here

- Status: accepted
- Deciders: [Dylan], [Ariel], [Phil]
- Date: 2024-07-22
- Authors: [Atticus], [Dylan], [Ariel], [Phil]

## Context and Problem Statement

> Performance of loading a user’s registered name is slow with the current method of loading all of the ArNS ecosystem (all ArNS names and ANTs registered to them). There is no way to quickly identify ownership of an ANT, let alone any AO process.

Reviewer 3: It's unclear to me reading this what is doing the loading.

> Performance of loading a user’s registered name is slow with the current method of loading all of the ArNS ecosystem (all ArNS names and ANTs registered to them). There is no way to quickly identify ownership of an ANT, let alone any AO process.

Reviewer 3: I always add line breaks rather than using long lines like this. It looks a little nice across various editors that way. This is _not_ that important though if it's inconvenient in your editor.

## Decision Drivers

The main drivers for this decision revolve around:

- **Speed**
  - Uses fewer resources client-side.
- **Scalability**
  - We cannot load the entire ArNS ecosystem client-side if it grows.
- **Ecosystem Integrations**
  - Having this utility process solely for ANT contract indexing provides integration points for other applications and reduces our reliance on other teams/products (e.g., Bazar profile processes).
- **Maintainability**
  - Since we control the registry process, we can drive its maintenance.

> ## Considered Options

Reviewer 3: Overall I like the terseness of this, but I'd probably still add a brief description of each of these options.

> ### ANT Registry

Reviewer 2: Consider expanding this to:
> ### Dedicated ANT Registry Process
> An AO Process that allows for permissionless reporting of the existence of ANTs by their Process ID that is capable of asynchronously, by way of AO messaging, retrieving, or being notified about, and then caching indexable information about ANTs, namely their owners and Controllers.

> - **Pros:**

Reviewer 2: I'd also add:
- Can support permissionless registration, thus allowing us to pre-register every ANT we've previously created during our migration to AO AND allowing 3rd party Processes to create and register ANTs on behalf of users.

  - Dedicated registry for ANTs.
  - Event-driven updates from ANTs.

>   - Separate state and compute from the resolver process.

Reviewer 2: , thus preserving system concurrency while providing for better UX in the system.

- **Cons:**

>   - Additional maintenance required.

Reviewer 2: I'd also add:
- Permissionlessness may invite spamming or DOSing

Reviewer: - debugging AO processes vs. off-chain services/caches is more difficult with _current_ tooling

> ### ArNS Resolver

Reviewer 2: Consider expanding to:
> ### Polling-based ArNS Resolver
> An expansion of responsibilities for the existing ArNS Resolver Process to periodically fetch, en masse, and cache the index-worth information for all ANTs registered to names.

- **Pros:**
  - Capable of resolving records and ANTs.
- **Cons:**
  - Does not resolve ANTs that are not registered.

>   - Complexity increases with integration of ANT updates.

Reviewer 2: - Performs unnecessary work for ANTs that have not changed
- Potentially shoulders all the gas burden for fetching ANT information

> ### Adding Ownership Info to the Network Process

Reviewer 2: Is `Network Process` the canonical name we're giving to the `ArNS Process` (or `IO Process`?)?

Author: we have been referring to it as that... thats what the repos refer to it as (ar-io-network-process, ar-io/network-portal). Its the gatewayAddressRegistry-ArNS-IO process lol. Network process for short.

- **Pros:**
  - Centralized control.
- **Cons:**
  - Increases complexity of the Network process.

>   - Reduces flexibility of ANT processes.

Reviewer 2: - Massively increases computational load and process memory - i.e. reduction in system concurrency

### Bazar Profile Processes and Profile Registry

- **Pros:**
  - Promising technology.
  - Future integration potential.
- **Cons:**
  - Currently in rapid development.
  - Managed by another team.
  - Complicates ownership resolution due to account abstraction.

> ## Decision Outcome

Reviewer 3: Nice work here. I feel like I understand the outcome well based on what you've written.

> It was decided to use an ANT registry due to the following downsides of other avenues:

Reviewer 2: Feels like everything after this is redundant. I think we can just concisely state which our preference is and perhaps indicate inline in the Cons sections above which of the downsides are unacceptable to us, and/or conversely which pros are most important to us.

Author: Went with making the important points in bold for the pros/cons and removed the redundant explainers
